दर्वासास्सुरवनिताप्तदिव्यमाल्यं
शक्राय स्वयमुपदाय तत्र भूय: ।
नागेन्द्रप्रतिमृदिते शशाप शक्रं
का क्षान्तिस्त्वदितरदेवतांशजानाम् ॥१॥
दुर्वासा:-	the sage Durvaasaa
सुर-वनिता-आप्त-दिव्य-माल्यं	from heavenly nymphs had obtained a divine garland
शुक्राय स्वयम्-उपदाय तत्र भूय:	to Indra,having personally given it there then
नागेन्द्र-प्रतिमृदिते	by Indra's elephant it being trampled
शशाप शक्रं	cursed Indra
का क्षान्ति:-	what forbearance (is there)
त्वत्-इतर-	other than Thee
देवता-अंशजानाम्	who are born of (other than Thee) Devas
The sage Durvaasaa once gave a celestial garland to Indra, which he had got from heavenly nymphs. When he saw the garland being crushed by Indra's elephant, he cursed Indra. Where can forbearance be seen except in those born of and blessed by Thee.
शापेन प्रथितजरेऽथ निर्जरेन्द्रे
देवेष्वप्यसुरजितेषु निष्प्रभेषु ।
शर्वाद्या: कमलजमेत्य सर्वदेवा
निर्वाणप्रभव समं भवन्तमापु: ॥२॥
शापेन प्रथित-जरे-अथ	due to the curse Indra became aged, then
निर्जर-इन्द्रे	Indra, who was ageless
देवेषु-अपि-असुर-जितेषु	when the Devas also were defeated by the Asuras
निष्प्रभेषु	(and so) had lost their glory
शर्व-आद्या:	beginning with Shiva
कमलजम्-एत्य	approaching Brahmaa
सर्व-देवा:	all the gods
निर्वाण-प्रभव	O Bestower of Salvation!
समं	with (Shiva)
भवन्तम्-आपु:	came to Thee
O Bestower of Liberation! Indra known as the unaging one, became aged as a result of Durvaasaa's curse. His followers, the Devas lost all their glory and were defeated by the Asuraas. The gods along with Shiva and others went to Brahmaa and they all took refuge in Thee.
ब्रह्माद्यै: स्तुतमहिमा चिरं तदानीं
प्रादुष्षन् वरद पुर: परेण धाम्ना ।
हे देवा दितिजकुलैर्विधाय सन्धिं
पीयूषं परिमथतेति पर्यशास्त्वम् ॥३॥
ब्रह्मा-आद्यै:	by Brahmaa and other gods
स्तुत-महिमा चिरं	being sung Thy excellences for long
तदानीं	at that time
प्रादुष्षन्	appearing
वरद	O Bestower of Boons!
पुर:	in front (of them)
परेण धाम्ना	with supreme glory (commanded)
हे देवा	O Gods!
दितिज-कुलै:-	with the Asuras,
विधाय सन्धिं	making peace,
पीयूषं परिमथत-	nectar churn out
इति पर्यशा:-त्वम्	thus commanded Thee
Brahmaa and the other gods sung Thy excellences for long. O Bestower of Boons! Thou then manifested Thyself before them in great glory and commanded them to make peace with the Asuras and then prepare to churn the milk ocean for nectar.
सन्धानं कृतवति दानवै: सुरौघे
मन्थानं नयति मदेन मन्दराद्रिम् ।
भ्रष्टेऽस्मिन् बदरमिवोद्वहन् खगेन्द्रे
सद्यस्त्वं विनिहितवान् पय:पयोधौ ॥४॥
सन्धानं कृतवति	having made peace
दानवै: सुरौघे	with the Asuras by the gods
मन्थानं नयति	when carrying the churning rod
मदेन मन्दर-अद्रिम्	with great pride, the Mandara mountain
भ्रष्टे-अस्मिन्	(when) it fell down
बदरम्-इव-उद्वहन्	as a berry picking it up
खगेन्द्रे सद्य:-त्वम्	On Garuda immediately Thou
विनिहितवान्	placed it
पय:पयोधौ	in the milk ocean
Devas made peace with the Asuras and with great pride carried the Mandara mountain for use as a churning rod. The mountain fell from their hands on the way. Then Thou seated on Garuda, picked it up as if it were a tiny berry and installed it in the milk ocean.
आधाय द्रुतमथ वासुकिं वरत्रां
पाथोधौ विनिहितसर्वबीजजाले ।
प्रारब्धे मथनविधौ सुरासुरैस्तै-
र्व्याजात्त्वं भुजगमुखेऽकरोस्सुरारीन् ॥५॥
आधाय द्रुतम्-अथ	placing quickly then
वासुकिं वरत्रां	Vaasuki (snake) (as the ) churning rope
पाथोधौ	in that milk ocean
विनिहित-सर्व-बीज-जाले	(in which) had been put all kinds of seeds and herbs
प्रारब्धे मथन-विधौ	having started the process of churning
सुर्-असुरै:-तै:-	by those gods and Asuras
व्याजात्-त्वं	Thou by a trick
भुजग-मुखे-अकरो:-	on the side of the serpent's mouth (Thou) put
सुरारीन्	the Asuras
Then quickly placing Vasuki snake as the churning rope, the Devas and Asuras started the process of churning the milk ocean in which all kinds of herbs and seeds had been put. Thou then cleverly made the Asuras hold the head end of the snake.
क्षुब्धाद्रौ क्षुभितजलोदरे तदानीं
दुग्धाब्धौ गुरुतरभारतो निमग्ने ।
देवेषु व्यथिततमेषु तत्प्रियैषी
प्राणैषी: कमठतनुं कठोरपृष्ठाम् ॥६॥
क्षुब्ध-आद्रौ	(when) the mountain (used as) a churning rod
क्षुभित-जल-उदरे	in the waters fully stirred
तदानीं	then
दुग्ध-अब्धौ	of the milk ocean
गुरुतर-भारत:	because of its (mountain's) heavy weight
निमग्ने	sank
देवेषु व्यथिततमेषु	the Devas becoming very worried
तत्-प्रियैषी	their (the Deva's) wellwisher (Thou)
प्राणैषी:	assumed
कमठ-तनुं	a tortoise form
कठोर-पृष्ठाम्	with a hard back
When the Mandara mountain as a churning rod had fully stirred the waters of the milk ocean to its depth, it sank due to its own weight. The Devas became very worried. Thee who are their well wisher, assumed the form of a tortoise with a hard back.
वज्रातिस्थिरतरकर्परेण विष्णो
विस्तारात्परिगतलक्षयोजनेन ।
अम्भोधे: कुहरगतेन वर्ष्मणा त्वं
निर्मग्नं क्षितिधरनाथमुन्निनेथ ॥७॥
वज्र-अति-स्थिर-कर्परेण	with the back more hard than the thunderbolt
विष्णो	O All Pervading being!
विस्तारात्-	and in extent (width)
परिगत-लक्ष-योजनेन	exceeding a lakh of Yojanas
अम्भोधे: कुहर-गतेन	(the rod) which had sunk deep into the ocean
वर्ष्मणा त्वं	with such a body Thou
निर्म्ग्नं क्षितिधरनाथम्-	the great mountain which had sunk (into the sea)
उन्निनेथ	(Thou) lifted up
O All pervading Being! by diving deep into the ocean Thou lifted up the sinking mountain on Thy back which was harder than a thunderbolt and more than a lakh of Yojanas in width.
उन्मग्ने झटिति तदा धराधरेन्द्रे
निर्मेथुर्दृढमिह सम्मदेन सर्वे ।
आविश्य द्वितयगणेऽपि सर्पराजे
वैवश्यं परिशमयन्नवीवृधस्तान् ॥८॥
उन्मग्ने	(the mountain) having come up
झटिति तदा	quickly then
धराधरेन्द्रे	the mountain,
निर्मेथु:-दृढम्-इह	they churned with great force, here
सम्मदेन सर्वे	(and) with enthusiasm all of them (the Asuras and the Devas)
आविश्य	(Thou) entering
द्वितयगणे-	into both the parties
अपि सर्पराजे	and also the serpent Vasuki
वैवश्यं	their fatigue
परिशमयन्	removing
अवीवृध: तान्	invigorated them
When the mountain was lifted up, they, the Devas and Asuras all churned with great force and enthusiasm. Thou entering into both the parties and also into the snake Vasuki, removed their fatigue and invigorated them.
उद्दामभ्रमणजवोन्नमद्गिरीन्द्र-
न्यस्तैकस्थिरतरहस्तपङ्कजं त्वाम् ।
अभ्रान्ते विधिगिरिशादय: प्रमोदा-
दुद्भ्रान्ता नुनुवुरुपात्तपुष्पवर्षा: ॥९॥
उद्दाम-भ्रमण-जव-	by the powerful speed of the whirling
उन्नमत्-गिरीन्द्र-	the mountain having come up
न्यस्त-एक-स्थिरतर-हस्त-पङ्कजम्	placed one strong lotus hand firmly
त्वाम्	Thou
अभ्रान्ते	in the heavens
विधि-गिरिश-आदय:	Brahmaa Shiva and other gods
प्रमोदात्-उद्भ्रान्ता	overwhelmed with joy
नुनुवु:-	praised Thee
उपात्त-पुष्प-वर्षा:	and shed showers of flowers
When the Mandara mountain rose up because of the powerful speed of the whirling, Thou placed Thy one lotus hand firmly on it, to keep it in position. Brahmaa Shiva and other gods were overwhelmed with joy and praised Thee as they shed showers of flowers.
दैत्यौघे भुजगमुखानिलेन तप्ते
तेनैव त्रिदशकुलेऽपि किञ्चिदार्ते ।
कारुण्यात्तव किल देव वारिवाहा:
प्रावर्षन्नमरगणान्न दैत्यसङ्घान् ॥१०॥
दैत्यौघे	(when) the group of Asuras
भुजग-मुख-अनिलेन	by the fire from the mouth of the serpent (the poisonous breath)
तप्ते	were scorched (tormented)
तेन-एव	by that even
त्रिदशकुले-अपि	the Devas also
किञ्चित्-आर्ते	were troubled a little
कारुण्यात्-तव	by Thy compassion
किल देव	Indeed O Lord!
वारिवाह: प्रावर्षन्-	The clouds were made to rain
अमरगणान्-	on the Devas
न दैत्य-सङ्घान्	not on the Asuras
The group of Asuras were scorched by the fire emitting from the mouth of the serpent. The Devas were also to some extent troubled. O Lord! By Thy compassion the clouds were made to rain on the Devas to cool them, but not on the Asuras.
उद्भ्राम्यद्बहुतिमिनक्रचक्रवाले
तत्राब्धौ चिरमथितेऽपि निर्विकारे ।
एकस्त्वं करयुगकृष्टसर्पराज:
संराजन् पवनपुरेश पाहि रोगात् ॥११॥
उद्भ्राम्यत्	ejecting up
बहु-तिमि-नक्र-चक्रवाले	many fish crocodiles and other aquatic creatures
तत्र-अब्धौ	there (when) the ocean
चिर-मथिते-अपि	in spite being churned for long
निर्विकारे	remained unchanged
एक:-त्वं	Thou alone
कर-युग-कृष्ट-सर्पराज:	with (Thy) two hands pulled the (two ends) of the serpent king
संराजन्	shining brightly
पवनपुरेश	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
पाहि रोगात्	relieve (me of my) diseases
In spite of being churned for long, the ocean remained unchanged, though many fish crocodile and other aquatic creatures were thrown up. Thou alone, then, shining brilliantly, with Thy two hands pulled the two ends of the serpent. O Lord of Guruvaayur! Relieve me of my diseases.